>> A powerful FDA-approved
anesthetic drug once used
mainly in operating rooms and
on the battlefield is quickly
gaining ground as one of
the most promising therapies
for treatment resistant
mental health conditions.
This is "Gaia News."
First discovered as an
anesthetic in the 1950s,
ketamine has since been
used in the treatment
of a wide range of
physical conditions,
especially in pain management.
Starting in the
early 1970s, doctors
began to find that
it can also be
very effective in
alleviating mental health
issues, such as depression,
anxiety, PTSD, and addiction.
Today, it is ever
more frequently
being studied and legally used
as an off-label medication
to manage conditions
that are particularly
resistant to treatment with
conventional pharmaceuticals.
The latest in a series
of recent studies
has found that ketamine can
quickly and dramatically
decrease chronic
suicidal thoughts.
Dr. Naveen Thomas
is a psychiatrist
who has been using ketamine
in his practice for years.
>> I and many of my colleagues
have had, of course,
tremendous success in using
ketamine in people who are
really suffering
from depression.
I've had a lot of success
in treating people
with post-traumatic
stress disorder.
And some of these folks
have spent years and years
doing absolutely
the best they could
using such a wide variety of
the conventional treatments,
be they various medication
treatments, be they
various forms of psychotherapy.
We've seen really
wonderful effects.
>> While the mechanism by which
ketamine works isn't entirely
clear, it is known that
it increases the amount
of a neurotransmitter
called glutamine.
This novel process likely
affects mood, thought patterns
and cognition by producing
a non-ordinary state
of consciousness.
It is also thought that as
with other psychedelics,
ketamine quiets the
brain's default mode
network, a dynamic
set of brain systems
that are active when we are
not engaged in a specific task.
Researchers believe it
is where we construct
the narrative of who
we are, and where
we can get stuck in
destructive thought patterns.
Ketamine is thought to exert
its effect by opening up
new pathways for thought.
>> In many mental
health conditions,
one of the challenges
that people struggle with,
is that self narrative can
often become rigid and fixed
and often, quite
negative in nature.
Ketamine at the right
doses, can even temporarily
disrupt that pattern
that happens.
And someone can have an
experience of themselves
as, let's say something
larger than that negative self
narrative.
That ability to alter
someone's state of awareness
is a really special
property of the medicine.
>> Ketamine can be administered
by a trained medical
professional in a number of
ways, including IV infusion,
intramuscularly, and orally.
Patients can receive
treatment in a range
of different settings, from
medical infusion clinics
to more personalized
psychotherapy sessions.
Kevin Thorbain sought
out ketamine treatment
after decades of unsuccessfully
battling mental health issues.
>> I dealt with depression and
anxiety most of my life in one
form or another.
And the pharmaceuticals
that I was placed on,
the SSRIs, the Prozacs,
the Zolofts, et cetera,
numbed my emotions
to the point where
I just kind of felt like a
zombie, like I had no emotions.
And the side effects that I had
were the suicidal tendencies.
I would constantly think
about ending my life.
>> Kevin learned of
ketamine therapy,
and has for the last few
years, been receiving treatment
as part of a protocol
called ketamine-assisted
psychotherapy, facilitated
by a group in Colorado called
Medicinal Mindfulness.
For Kevin and many
other patients,
the results of a limited
course of treatment
are profound and long-lasting.
>> Really, one of the primary
healing modalities of the work
is offering people enough
of these, what I call,
expanded states, these
non-ordinary states
of consciousness, as the
primary healing modality.
Over time, they may not actually
need the ketamine treatment
indefinitely.
Hopefully, whatever
is out of balance
at some root level
came back into balance.
>> First few months after that
first session were amazing.
I was incredibly happy.
And as far as any anxious
suicidal thoughts,
they were gone.
It never even entered
my mind at all.
My life, my personal life
seemed to get better and better
the more sessions that I did.
I was able to
become more stable.
So it was kind of quick
the first session,
like I got a glimpse of
it, what it could do.
But then the
subsequent sessions I
was able to go deeper and deeper
within myself to really heal
myself so from within.
>> While ketamine is
generally considered safe,
as with all medications, it is
not appropriate for everyone.
There are certain
health conditions,
such as cardiovascular
disease and history
of psychosis, which
would preclude someone
from treatment.
Dr. Naveen Thomas also
stresses the importance
of working closely with a
trained medical professional
in the correct set
and setting, as is
done within the
ketamine-assisted psychotherapy
protocol.
>> The whole point in some ways,
is to really create a really
nurturing setting to get someone
into the most ideal mindset
and with a therapist who really
knows what they're doing,
is certified in this
work, and use this space,
this expanded state, as a
tool for transformation.
>> Those who have experienced
the benefits of ketamine see it
as a blessing and have high
hopes that it will continue
to be studied and become
more widely available.
>> In general, it's really
gratifying for me to witness
people who are
experiencing what I call,
the bigness of themselves,
experiencing themselves
as a human being in the
fullest sense of the word.
>> For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."